Welcome to this week's episode of the Grand Prixquel Podcast.
Given there has not been a lot of feeder series action lately,
we figured we would give a brief intro into the world of feeder series,
as well as answering some of your questions.
Your hosts for this week are myself, Peter, Evan, Nova, and Alex.
Okay, so, Formula 4.
Probably the least known one out of this,
because I know that a lot of people that even watch some feeder series
don't typically know this, so we are going to get right into it.
F4 is usually national, but sometimes a few countries bound together
and they have their own very small series.
This is because the drivers are typically aged like 15 to 16,
and it's just something, it's the smallest series that you can do.
And it's usually very short races.
It's like just weekend, usually also just Saturday and Sunday,
because the drivers are aged 15 to 16,
as I said, you know, they shouldn't be here, they should be in school.
But though thing is, it's usually the series where people start out when they come from karting.
So as soon as you turn 15, quite a few guys, if you have the funds,
you directly make the jump into single seaters and you do this.
Usually, most drivers only do a season and like a few rounds when they turn 15.
And then next year, when, you know, the year they turn 16, they do more, they do the whole season.
Like an example, Kimi Antonelli, as soon as he turned 15, he did the last few rounds of the Italian F4.
But then the next year, he did the full season.
And that's like the usual thing.
Important about this one is also that there's like quite a few series,
and most of them can be separated into two sides.
We have the FIA sanctioned series, which are usually the bigger ones with Italian F4, British F4, Spanish F4, French F4, Japanese F4, Chinese F4, NACAM, so North and Central American F4, F4 United States, F4 Southeast Asia, Brazilian F4, F4 Central European Zone, Indian F4 and the F4 World Cup at Macau.
And all of these series have in common that they generally have, they don't all drive the same car because the car depends on the series.
But in the series, everyone drives the same car, the same engine.
But they are all pretty much the same when we talk about how long is a race, what power does the car have.
And they work with the FIA to, you know, make sure that there's like the baseline of similar competition.
So no matter if you do like F4 in Southeast Asia or Italian F4, you should have the same base level of technical understanding.
It's still different because obviously the Italian F4 grid is vastly different from the grid of F4 Southeast Asia.
And it's kind of the biggest problem that we have in Formula Fours because there's just this huge difference between the biggest and the smallest series.
But also there's the second side and that's the non-FIA sanctioned championships, which is usually small, even smaller, even cheaper.
And this includes GB4, Formula 1 Series, UAE4, AU, which I think is Australia F4, SMP F4, which is like Russian F4, Nordic F4, which is like Nordic countries.
E4, which is a side series to Italian F4, Formula 1 Academy and Saudi F4.
And generally what we have to say about all of these series overall is majority of them use the Tatuus F4-T421, just, you know, just same car in most series.
There's different engine makers depending on where the series is usually located.
And because of that, it's a spec series.
Spec series means generally all the cars, all the things are the same.
It's like one spec, which everyone works with, which is supposed to help that, you know, everyone has the same chances just because you're rich or it doesn't mean that you can buy better cars the way it is in Formula 1 is an example.
But the problem is, it's not quite true because there's huge difference between what the biggest team in Italian F4 can put on track to what the smallest team in F4 Southeast Asia can put on track.
Because we talked about the biggest teams before, teams that have huge experience of decades in the sport, that have engineers that know s***, that have simulators that are really good, that have just all these resources that smaller teams do not have.
And so there's still, you see the performance difference.
You will, when you see any feeder series, you will always see majorly the same few teams at the front.
And sometimes it happens that you have a driver who you think, hey, he's maybe not as promising so far.
But as soon as he steps into a really good car, suddenly he's at the front.
And it's a really important thing to note because I see the conversation again and again that people are not aware of this.
And last but not least on the topic of F4, we have to talk about because F4 is supposed to be the entry level.
And the problem with F4, which I already mentioned, is we have so many different series.
We have series like F1 Academy, which is not allowed to cost more,
I think it was 100,000 pounds per season.
The problem is that there is no baseline for a lot of the other series.
French F4, as an example, is completely done by the FFSA, which is like they run all the cars.
So there's no difference between teams.
And so for everyone, it's roughly 150,000 euros.
But there's also other series like especially Italian F4, which I think I mentioned before is the biggest F4 series there is.
And for Italian F4, for the top teams, quite a few of our current F1 drivers have been in Italian F4 and have won it.
And so it's like the most important series, the most, the biggest series just.
And so as we heard last year from Andy Consani, a season in Italian F4, which usually includes also Euro 4 and a winter series at Prema, which at the time was the biggest team, could easily cost a million to 1.5 million euros.
Which, if we step back, these are 15 to 16 year olds.
That's, I think, pretty much all I can say about F4 at the moment.
But if, oh wait, I’ll add, usual weekend set up in is just general tests, the days beforehand, oftentimes quite a few tests because majority of the drivers just come really young.
They don't know the cars.
They don't know the tracks very well.
So that they do, I think in most times, it's just called testing, not even free practice, because that's what happens later on.
And you're not obligated to always enter every single test.
Then the qualifying setup and the race setup kind of is different between series because, like, as an example, I think it was Italian F4 that had the qualifying setup where you had to qualify even for the races because they had so many entries.
While British F4, as an example, has reverse grid races.
So if we were to talk about the different F4 series, we'd also talk about different setups.
But in general, most F4 series have multiple races per weekend and the races are usually, like, 20 to 30 minutes long.
I think that's it.
Anyone has anything to add?
Um, no, I think I'll move on to Formula Regional next.
So Formula Regional is the next step after Formula 4.
Drivers are typically around 16 to 18 years old.
I believe you need to be at least 16 years old to compete in Formula Regional.
And it's very much the midpoint between Formula 4 and Formula 3.
But the cars are very similar to Formula 3.
According to drivers who have said this, the cars have a similar weight but a lot less downforce and power.
There are several FIA-sanctioned championships, one for each region as it is in the name.
So there's European, Oceania, Middle East, Americas and Japanese with the Formula Regional European or FREC being the most popular, I would say.
And it's typically the one people will go to.
However, there are also a few non-FIA-sanctioned championships such as Eurocup 3 and GB3 which are a bit smaller but they pretty much use the similar cars.
And of course we can mention the Formula World Cup in Macau.
So currently they use in FREC as well as in- they use the Tatuus F3 T-326.
And it's very much variations of this generally across the series.
And yeah, that's pretty much Formula Regional.
The main difference between the series is just the tracks are racing on.
So in FREC it is very much a typical track such as the Red Bull Ring, Barcelona.
Whereas in America they're racing tracks like COTA.
I think there's not too much else to say about Formula Regional.
Wait, I want to throw in something which is Formula Regional Middle East is quite often like in the winter time because that's the best time to race in the Middle East.
So it's usually taken as like, you know, the winter series in between.
But we have to talk about how crazy the difference is between-
I don't think we have anyone on the grid who like seriously did Formula Regional Americas, in F1 I mean.
Because the difference between these series is so huge.
Like everyone goes to Europe to compete in FREC.
Even if you're from America, you go to Formula Regional Europe because the grid is so, so much stronger.
It's actually insane.
It's even worse than in F4.
And now moving on to F3, which used to be a regional championship, but now is one big championship under the FIA called the FIA Formula 3 Championship from 2019 onwards.
This tends to be seen as a step up from regional where you start joining the “big boys” of the single seater world on the track to Formula 1.
Formula 3 is one of the support series that is normally seen on F1 weekends driving at the F1 tracks, usually at the European tracks.
And their season is shorter than the F1 and F2 seasons.
There are less drivers in Formula 3 compared to Regional, but there are more drivers than in F2.
With the race weekend format is pretty similar to F2, where there is practice and then quali.
We have the sprint and the feature races.
The sprint race is dictated by the top 12 in quali being on a reverse grid, meaning that the one who qualified 12 will then start first on the grid.
Everyone below 12 will just start from where they originally qualified.
And the feature race just follows the normal quali, as always, within F3.
They currently use the Dallara F3 ever since 2025.
And they do use a Mechachrome engine, the second-gen Mechachrome engine, which differs slightly from the F2 engine, where it's a naturally aspirated engine, whereas in F2, they use a turbocharged Mechachrome engine.
The reason this is considered a step up from Formula Regional is that it starts introducing aspects of F2 and F1 that are not seen in the Regional, where DRS is introduced into the engine.
There's higher output. The cars are much faster compared to FR. The engines have higher horsepower, from the 270 horsepower that was in the FR engine, all the way up to 380.
As mentioned before, F3 is technically a spec series, which, with every cars having the same engine and having the same chassis.
However, there has been, of course, domination over the years.
Used to be Prema very early on into its inauguration as the FIA Formula 3 Championship, but it's recently moved on to Trident within the past three years of the championship.
And this is usually considered the best step up from Regional as the grid gets smaller and the age range gets slightly bigger.
The age range of F3 drivers tend to be 16, with the minimum age being 16, up to about 20.
However, I do not know how old the oldest current driver is. I think that's it.
Okay, and I guess that means Formula 2 is the final step in the FIA's pathway from karting to F1.
Currently, F2 is represented by the FIA Formula 2 Championship ever since 2017.
However, previously we did have the GP2 Series from 2005 to 2016.
As mentioned earlier, it has a reduced grid compared to Formula 3, where you've got 22 drivers with 11 teams, which means two teams each.
The race format, you've got a practice and then qualifying. However, qualifying is just one single session.
That goes about 40 minutes, if I remember right, which is different compared to F1,
which splits it up into three different segments. The top 10 in qualifying in F2 are then reversed around for the sprint race.
With P10- with 10th in qualifying starting first in sprint and so on and so forth.
And the point system is also pretty similar to the F1 sprint point system, if I remember right.
And then you've got a feature race as well with the exact same point system as F1.
Though additionally, there is still a fastest lap point, which is no longer present in F1 as well.
Currently, they use the Dallara F2 2024 car. This is after they had the Dallara F2 2018 car, which was replaced again in 2024.
It also uses the same second-gen Mechachrome engine, however, it is a turbocharged unit instead.
And it makes 620 horsepower in comparison to 380 with Formula 3.
However, the engine is essentially the exact same style of engine.
It's just differences in not being naturally aspirated and in horsepower amounts.
And also, just the same as Formula 3 and every other category within the pathway to F1, F2 is also a spec series.
So obviously, that means every team should hypothetically have the same engine, same chassis, same everything.
However, it is pretty debatable as to whether or not this spec series sort of illusion is actually a proper thing that works.
Because we've seen, especially with the new Dallara F2 car since 2024 and 2025, there's been a really large influx of drivers who were traditionally pretty good in previous seasons,
so drivers who previously drove the Dallara F2 2018 with the second-gen engine, the first-gen engine as well.
And the reliability around this.
Some drivers like Victor Martins, notably.
Can't think off the top of my head, but there's quite a few drivers who have been heavily impacted by the engine.
Oh yeah, Kimi Antonelli and Ollie Bearman as well in their 2024 season and 2023 seasons.
It's also, at least previously, it has been a lot more team-reliant as to how performant your car is.
And even now, it is still the same deal, especially a bit more with the Mechachrome engine being a bit more unreliable.
For example, we've previously seen that Invicta Racing generally has much more faster and more reliable cars in comparison to teams that may have topped with the previous car like Prema.
And so in that case, you're not going to be really winning the title itself in maybe an AIX Racing car or a Trident, which really undermines the whole spec series illusion, I suppose.
F2 also is generally speaking where everyone comes through into F1.
We have some exceptions, obviously, but a majority of our grid has come from F2 or GP2.
For example, we've got Lewis Hamilton, Nico Hulkenberg, Sergio Perez, Pierre Gasly, Charles Leclerc, George Russell, Lando Norris, Alex Albon, Oscar Piastri, Liam Lawson, Ollie Bearman, Franco Colapinto, Isack Hadjar, Gabriel Bortoleto, Kimi Antonelli, and Arvid Lindblad have all come through the F2, GP2 category.
And yeah, I think that's it, unless anyone else has anything else to add.
I would add that F2 is the first series where they are required to do pit stops in the feature race, which I think is really important because it again shows up how much they change.
I think it is regularly F3 where they first get DRS and it's like, it's not just a way to get into faster cars, but it's also the way to get really close and closer to the way an F1 weekend works.
Like, then you add the tire strategies.
You have to really work with the tires, where in like a force use as an example, where you have to take a bit of care of tires.
You don't have to manage your tires as much as you have to do in F2, which is, again, close to F1 again.
Do we want to do honourable mentions or?
Yeah, so, of course, in America, you have the road to Indy.
So this is very much kind of IndyCar’s version of the FIA Pathway to Formula One.
You start off in USF Juniors, you then progress to USF 2000, USF Pro 2000, IndyNXT and eventually IndyCar.
And compared to the kind of F1 ladder in this one, when you win, you pretty much get a funded seat up to the next level, which is very nice to see.
And you're slightly younger, you start off in USF Juniors at the age of 14.
And of course, before you start off in cars, you have to do karting, which is very much the first step.
And drivers can be as young as five, six years old when they start karting.
I want to mention one last FIA series, which is Super Formula Lights, which anyone here knows Super Formula, which is like a Japanese single-seater series.
And it's like, as far as I know, and I've heard it, it's like one of the fastest single-seater series in the world, like the closest that you can get to Formula One.
They have Super Formula Lights, so like the feeder series to Super Formula.
Yeah, I think now we will go over some questions that you guys have sent us in on Twitter.
So, how do you even start watching feeder series?
I mean, I personally think the best level is F2, because it's kind of the most similar to F1.
You can watch it wherever you watch F1, and it's great for an introductory way to feeder series, and as you get more into it, you begin to watch the lower levels.
And the great thing about, at the F4 and the Formula Regional level, is because these series are a lot smaller, they are streamed for free on YouTube. Like for example, there’s an Italian F4 YouTube page, you can easily watch all the races there.
I'd also add that feederseriesnet on Instagram posts the timings for every weekend, which I find to be super easy, because it's not always just like the easiest way to, you know, find out when and what is racing.
So, that's a really great way to get into it.
So, next question.
What is the difference between GB4 and British F4?
I wanted to answer this one.
I've already mentioned British F4 is FIA licensed, GB4 is not.
And the biggest difference is just GB4 is a lot cheaper, and it's a lot more independent, because they do not have to follow any of the official FIA rules.
So, it's cheaper.
They use different cars that aren't really used in any other series anymore, because, again, they're not FIA licensed.
They don't have to do any of that.
And it's a great way for young drivers, especially, to get into racing, while British F4 has a really, really competitive grid.
But it's also smaller, because it's so, so expensive.
But, also, if you do British F4, you usually really plan to go a longer way, while in GB4, it's possible to do it for a cheaper price, just get the first vibes of a car.
You know, a lot of drivers do GB4 before they then step up to a GB3 or British F4, because it's a great, really small series.
And it's really easy to get your first experience in a car for a price that a lot more drivers can actually pay.
Our next question was, what is the hardest F4 champion?
And what is the difference between each of the F4 championships and the Formula Regional championships?
So, in terms of the hardest, I would take this as being the most competitive.
So, the most competitive championships are very much Italian and British F4.
And this is where some of the biggest talent goes, such as, you know, Dries Van Langendonck, currently is going to be competing in British F4.
And, I mean, the difference is, there are slight car differences and chassis and engine differences, but they are all broadly very much the same.
But a major difference is the sort of tracks you race on, because that's in completely different parts of the world.
And another big difference would also be the cost.
Italian F4, as you've heard, can be 500,000 euros, whereas something such as Indian F4 is a lot smaller, going to be a lot cheaper.
And it's the same in Formula Regional in terms of differences.
You may have minor chassis differences, but the main differences are the costs, the region one is racing in and the level of talent in it.
Yeah, I mean, it sounds really silly, but if you watch Spanish F4, they pretty much only drive on Spanish circuits.
If you watch French F4, they pretty much only drive on French circuits.
Like, that's really the biggest difference.
So, and we can directly jump over to what's the difference between F4 cars and F3 cars.
F4 cars, they don't have DRS.
They're smaller, they're more lightweight, they are slower.
You know, they have, they just, it's not easy to drive, but it's like, in comparison to F3, it's easier because it's generally the thing where you can, you have to train and stuff, but you can pretty much step in as a 15-year-old and train and get there.
Where F3, pretty much expect that you've already driven F4 and from the region before because it has DRS.
It's a lot faster.
It's heavier.
You have to have a lot more power in your arms because these cars do not have power steering.
So you have to really train to get there to be able to steer those cars because they're also obviously targeted to drive differently.
Our next question was, what is the difference between Italian F4 and E4?
Italian F4 is very much the main series the drivers would compete in, whereas E4 was created to give drivers more racing opportunities after ADAC, which is German F4, folded.
Typically, drivers, such as, you know, both Ollie Bearman and Kimi Antonelli did this and they won both.
They would do both Italian and German F4 simultaneously just to give more racing opportunities to the drivers.
Okay, and our next question is, what do you think of big jumps in feeder series, like from F4 to F3 or from FR to F2?
It feels pretty natural for the drivers to go through the usual pathway of F4, FR, F3 to F2.
It just, the speed ramps up, there's bigger audiences with every level.
However, some drivers have done it and succeeded.
One major example of this is Kimi Antonelli going from Formula Regional straight to F2, which he seemed to succeed pretty well in, along with Ollie Bearman, who skipped FRECA.
However, certain drivers, despite not being very far into the season yet, we've seen it so far with Fionn McLaughlin and Emerson Fittipaldi Jr., who both skipped a level and seem to be struggling.
But either way, it just seems a bit more natural to have the ascending levels as they normally are, rather than skipping some.
I want to point out when we talk about this, that like feeder series, in a way, are currently really changing.
They're like still in a way, where a lot of things are still happening.
Like there's a lot more F4s popping up.
There's a lot more Formula Regional.
There's a lot more drivers coming in.
And so we've seen it a lot, a lot in the past, that drivers would skip stuff, but it's less and less done these days because drivers that do it usually do it because they have support by an F1 team that wants to get them through the standings faster.
And instead of doing a full season, they instead do like a lot of testing and they get help to skip that.
But usually it's supposed to keep in this pathway only that the pathway is like pretty young.
If we talk about F3 only being really started in the way that exists right now in 2019.
Our final question is, is it possible to watch karting?
So for all of the major championships that are streamed on YouTube, recently we have the WSK Super Master Series and all of those you are able to watch on YouTube.
Well, I think that'll be it for this episode of the Grand Prixquel Pod.
Be sure to give us a follow on Twitter, Instagram and TikTok @grandprixquel.
And let us know your thoughts about this episode if you want to see something similar to this in the future.
Next episode, we're going to be looking at karting through the WSK Super Master Series.
So let us know what you want to see and know about karting on our socials.
And thanks for listening.